##  Jenkins installation:
--------------------------
software :window/ubuntu
commands:
1. sudo apt-get update -y
2. sudo apt-ci install openjdk-8-jre-headless --yes
3. wget -q -O - https://pkg.jenkins.io/debian/jenkins.io.key | sudo apt-key add -
4. sudo sh -c 'echo "deb http://pkg.jenkins.io/debian-stable binary/" > /etc/apt/sources.list.d/jenkins.list'
5. sudo apt-get update -y && sudo apt-get install jenkins -y
6. sudo systemctl start jenkins
7. sudo systemctl enable jenkins
8. sudo cat /var/lib/jenkins/secrets/initialAdminPassword -->to get password to login

## Jenkins:
-----------
Jenkins is a open-source automation server tool which is used to automated the software development process.
It allows the CI/CD of the projects enables the developers to identifies the errors and solve  defects in the code.
## CI/CD pipeline:
 ------------
 CI/CD pipeline is an automated process that integrates code changes, builds, tests, and deploys software applications to production, ensuring faster, more reliable, and higher-quality releases.

package :it is a format which we can deploy on a end user platform likes laptop,mobiles etc

static code analysis: which gives the standard of the code(quality).
## plugin:
----------------
plugins are the tools which are used to automate the process of the software development. They are used to enhance and customize Jenkins to support various build, test, and deployment scenarios.

## cronjob:
--------
A cron job is a time-based job scheduler in Unix-like operating systems. It allows users to schedule tasks or commands to run periodically at specified times or intervals.By using cronjob we can schedule the process build process whenever we want.

## workspaces:
------------
The workspace directory is where Jenkins builds your project: it contains the source code Jenkins checks out, plus any files generated by the build itself. 

=>In java we can package code as jar/war files by using maven/gradle as a build tool and .net/any other  package the code as exe/dlls formats(Eg:.exe files)
""version of any application with number=1.0/any/2.0-release is ready for release for the end user  and version=1.0-snapshot refer to under development process.""

## maven:
-----------
Apache Maven is a software project management and comprehension tool. Based on the concept of a project object model (POM), Maven can manage a project's build, reporting and documentation from a central piece of information.
Maven is an open source project management and build automation tool. It helps in managing dependencies among projects and builds them automatically.

## goals 
-------
clean        : clean build (remove all generated or temporary files)
compile      : compile source code (using Incremental Build)
test         : run unit tests (and checkstyle, findbugs, jspc)
jar          : create JAR from compiled classes (including dependencies)
install      : install project artifacts into local Maven repository
deploy       : deploy project artifacts into remote Maven repository
site         : generate site documentation for this project
checkstyle   : execute checkstyle check for Java sources
findbugs     : execute find bugs analyzer and report warnings (and fail if any errors are found)
pmd          : execute pmd meter and report violations (and fail if any errors are found)
maven-archiver: Archive project artifacts and pom into a single file

## Day build:-
----------
 Building the code using CI/CD during the working hrs. In build the team will executes the continuous integration only when the developer commits the code to GitHub.

## Night build:
----------------
 Building the code using CI/CD during the post working hrs. In night build continuous delivery/deployment occurs. It done only onces in a day. Night build runs minimum 5-6 hrs .

 ## poll SCM:
  ----------------
   polling means the Jenkins will communicate with git repository for minute/30min/hr etc.

## environment variables in jenkins:

   Environment variables are key-value pairs that contain information about the system environment. In Jenkins, those variables may be configured globally or at the job level, providing us with a way to customize and parameterize our builds.
   

## Pipeline as a code:
---------------------
Pipeline as Code describes a set of features that allow Jenkins users to define pipelined job processes with code, stored and versioned in a source repository

there are two types we define pipelines
1. Scripted pipeline
2. Declarative pipeline 

## Scripted pipeline:
---------------------
Scripted pipeline is a way to define a pipeline in a Jenkinsfile. It is a Groovy script that defines the steps of the pipeline.


## Declarative pipeline
--------------------
Jenkins Declarative Pipeline is a more recent addition to Jenkins as a code pipeline definition approach. It offers a more simplified and structured way of defining your pipelines compared to the traditional scripted pipeline syntax.


## JNLP(JAVA NETWORK LAUNCH  PROTOCOL)
--------------------------------------------
It is the way to start the java process on a machine and connect to the jenkins master to offer services as a build agent.
It allows Jenkins to launch agents on-demand, rather than having to pre-configure a fixed number of agents.
JNLP agents are launched using a Java Web Start application.JNLP uses port number(50000) as default helps to communicate b/w master and worker nodes in large workloads.




